# The abyss stares back

I've noticed a pattern in myself over the last few years. My opinion on all of this tends to wildly flip-flop back and forth at predictable intervals. Not on whether or not CSS is shit; that's always been true. It's whether or not I think that pushing through anyways is worth it. The way it goes is this:

**Me, during the up-swing**: "Yes, CSS is garbage and nearly unusable in all but the simplest of scenarios. But so much of the world runs on this language, so as a programmer (or even anyone making a living off of computers) I need to learn it and be comfortable around it. I'm not in a position where I can reasonably live a webtech-hermit existence, and even if I was there's still the problem of employers. The difference between my effectiveness/efficiency when I feel comfortable with my environment, feel in control, and free to make constant progress vs when I don't is *dramatic*. But even if I were to show an employer that difference it wouldn't matter, since developing on software with a team of near-strangers means that everyone is going to be uncomfortable, nobody can feel in control and aware, and rate of progress depends on others. The thing they have to care about is conformity, so just learn the dumb tech that everyone is using, and maybe one day you'll get to the point where you can work in an environment that feels like your personal projects and will make you *want* to come to work every day."

**Me, during the down-swing**: "No... *NO*. No. If these people wanted me to make websites using their language, they wouldn't have made it so completely fucked. Why did I spend 2 hours fiddling with CSS knobs, re-reading specs, and *eventually failing* to get 2 pieces of text to draw at the same baseline? That should take 1 line of code! Those things that make me more effective/efficient also affects how I feel, and I feel bad after I know I did a shitty job. So why would I spend a day of stop-and-go progress, manipulating hierarchies that I know going in won't be able to express the things I want to see output at the end of the day? I've used hierarchies enough times to know they make a very poor stand-in for logic, so why put up with them? Yes all that stuff about employers are true, but there's another road that I can take: when I have to use these things I shouldn't try super hard to do a good job (because I know I won't be able to anyways), and use my remaining energy to focus on the side projects that *do* make me happy. If I can show my ability to make things on my own, maybe someone will hire me and let me do things my way. Or if one of these projects turns out to be sellable, that's another way out. Either way, the road is out and not further in."

It's probably a good thing that those down-swings don't last very long. They seem detrimental to my livelihood. For the past 3 years that I've noticed it, it seems to be a yearly cycle with the down-swing happening around early/mid-summer till around early/mid-fall.

If it's not obvious, this applies to everything. Replace "CSS" with anything you want (anything web, anything corporate, etc) and you should be able to fill in the rest of the nouns fairly easily. That's not to say that these things have no value or are purely bad. But I am saying that if 3 months out of the year I feel like something is pushing me back to my "happy place," there's something wrong.

I'm left wondering whether it was even a good idea to go into programming. Don't get me wrong, I love programming: I love creating things and computers are by far the greatest creation tools humans have ever made. But when I look at people in our sister profession, IT, I feel a little jealous. All the IT people that I've known all seem very chill and relaxed. They all seem to know that everything is broken but they still try to get everything working in the simplest possible way with the least amount of moving parts. Their decisions seem to come from actual experience with actual peoples' problems. This is contrasted against our profession, where it seems to me like solving actual peoples' problems is only an excuse, a backdrop to do what programmers *actually* want, which is to satisfy their aspyness and OCD cravings for everything to exist in hierarchies, for all things to be categorized and organized *just right*. I used to not like the idea of IT, and I told myself that it was because I don't like playing plumber, I don't like it when things fail silently or cryptically, and I don't like feeling like I have no control over a system of things that all act on their own. But looking back at the last couple days redoing this site, and my last year of professional programming I'm reminded of a pot that called a kettle black.

